♪ Away in a manger ♪
♪ No crib for his bed ♪
♪ The little Lord Jesus... ♪
Do you suppose it's true that
no two snowflakes are alike? I hope so.
It's kind of comforting, isn't it?
And the bank manager,
who happens to be my uncle,
he said that the Cuthberts are poor.
I've heard it said that snow
is a sign of God's forgiveness, and--
[teacher] Shh!
♪ Asleep on the hay ♪
By blanketing the ugly frozen earth,
and making it beautiful.
Anne is poor?
What do you mean "poor"?
Poor as in "penniless old fellow
with no head for finance."
-That's not very nice.
-[Moody] Snow means Christmas is coming.
-And I love Christmas. Don't you?
-I don't know, but I plan to.
Did you not have Christmas
at the orphanage?
There wasn't much to it, really.
I'm not sure why Father Christmas
wasn't able to stop there.
Maybe the matron scared him off.
That can't be true.
[Josie]
The Cuthberts had to mortgage their farm.
Isn't that sad?
Josie Pye, you take that back!
Why are you upset?
It's only true. You're poor.
Wait, you didn't know?
Do you know if they're going to keep you?
Keep me?
[teacher] Next.
Come along. "In Excelsis Deo."
That's right, children. Come along now.
Take your places, please.
♪ Angels we have heard on high ♪
♪ Sweetly singing oe'er the plains ♪
♪ And the mountains in reply ♪
♪ Echoing their joyous strains ♪
-♪ Gloria ♪
-[gasping breaths]
♪ In excelsis Deo ♪
Anne?
-♪ Gloria ♪
-[door opens, closes]
Are you sure you're all right?
-Maybe you should slow down.
-I have to get on home.
Oh, Diana, it can't be true.
It isn't. That Josie Pye
is just as mean as they make 'em.
She hadn't any right
to tell tales about you.
My first family. My first home.
They're not going to send you back.
You're in the Bible and everything.
We can't lose Green Gables. We just can't.
[Marilla] You mortgaged the farm?
Are you out of your mind?
-You took out a loan against Green Gables?
-It had to be done.
Why did you take such an action
without discussing it with me?
I was trying to protect us.
Make the best out of a... a bad situation.
The crop was lost. We didn't have means.
Yet another thing you neglected
to mention. This is my home, too.
-And Anne's!
-I didn't want to talk about it.
You didn't trust me?
To talk about our future? Anne's future?
[horse neighs]
[Matthew] I knew you'd lose your head.
[Marilla] Oh, I ought to smack yours
right off your shoulders!
[Matthew] Well, uh...
We have the loan. That's done.
And with it,
I have purchased everything that we need.
-You've already spent the money?
-Yes.
-Madness!
-On high yield crops--
This is madness!
[yells] Why can't you just listen?
[clock ticking]
We'll have a high-yield crop
and then another in the fall.
So now we have two new crops,
in addition to the potatoes.
We'll be fine, Marilla.
So now, at your age,
you're working even harder?
It's just...
It's a bit more work, uh, that's all.
I don't want you doing more.
-I want you doing less!
-[groans]
-Matthew? Matthew!
-[Matthew grunts]
[Anne] Matthew?
-What's happened?
-[Marilla] I don't know.
-[Anne] W-W-What's wrong?
-Oh, dear God. Oh! I--
♪ First thing we'd climb a tree ♪
♪ And maybe then we'd talk ♪
♪ Or sit silently ♪
♪ And listen to our thoughts ♪
♪ With illusions of someday ♪
♪ Casting a golden light ♪
♪ No dress rehearsal ♪
♪ This is our life ♪
♪ You are ahead by a century ♪
-♪ This is our life ♪
-♪ You are ahead by a century ♪
He's had an episode of the heart.
An occurrence of coronary thrombosis.
He's extremely lucky it wasn't fatal,
but, make no mistake,
he's in a dangerous condition.
-Dangerous?
-It's going to take a long time to heal.
He's gonna need months of rest,
with no stress or work of any kind.
[Marilla] Thank you.
[fire crackles]
[exhales]
[footsteps approaching]
You should be asleep.
So should you.
[sighs]
[Anne sighs]
I wish I had a head for numbers.
I'm a dunce at geometry,
but I'm pretty good at math now.
Which part is troublesome?
Here... and here.
This is the amount
that was borrowed against the bank.
Yes, that much I know.
And this is the rate of interest.
Gosh, it's very high.
[sighs]
And the payback schedule's very short.
Let me see.
And carry one...
[sighs]
I guess Matthew was counting
on making this amount from the new crops,
plus the potato crops?
I'll have to go speak with the bank.
I need some clarity.
-I'm coming with you.
-[low chuckle]
Even if you're not keeping me.
Not keeping you?
You're a Cuthbert.
For better or for worse.
No getting out of it now.
And no need for you to come with.
[exhales]
There most certainly is.
I know for a fact
that when one is under stress
it's hard to hear what's being said.
It's as if the person speaking
is miles away or under water.
I'll keep good watch over him.
We'll be back, quick as we can.
This is most irregular.
Where is Mr. Cuthbert?
Indisposed. Unfortunately.
I'm here on his behalf.
[man] Most irregular.
[Marilla]
My brother has suffered a heart attack.
It'll be many months until he is well.
Difficult news, indeed.
Yes.
I'm...
We're...
Matthew and I are wondering
about the terms of the loan...
and if we might get an extension
on the payments.
The terms of the loan are clear.
Mr. Cuthbert was the asset we invested in.
That's why I'm hoping to renegotiate.
In light of the situation?
It seems you don't understand.
This loan is now a bad risk.
I am going to have
to exercise this clause here
to pull the loan back.
Pull it back?
What exactly does that mean?
[exhales]
I have already stated
that Mr. Cuthbert is the asset.
If he is not able to work the land,
then we must call in the loan
by the end of the month.
I'm sorry, but if there's no potential
for return on our investment,
the investment must be returned,
or the property forfeit.
It is all right there.
Wait here, please.
I have a quick errand to run.
Green Gables is 11 letters.
Adding up the rest...
36 letters, total.
How much is that for the advertisement?
And how much more would it be
for distribution to the mainland?
[door closes]
[Rachel] Welcome home, dear ones.
Sit down, sit down. I stoked the fire.
Warm your wee selves up.
Matthew is resting well.
What happened at the bank?
It's the end of everything.
We're ruined.
We're gonna lose the farm.
Lose Green Gables.
Can nothing be done?
Well, our only hope would be
to somehow raise the amount of the loan.
We have to try.
Everything of value
will have to be sold. Right quick.
It's a fearful sum.
I shall rally the troops in town.
I'm sure folks will want
to make a contribution.
-No! I will not accept charity.
-But--
That's final, Rachel. I won't hear of it.
The Cuthberts do not
and will not take charity.
The Barrys will buy our cattle.
[sighs] We can't keep Jerry on.
Best get it over with.
[door opens, closes]
[sighs]
[fire crackles]
[footsteps approaching]
When you see everything
together like this,
it's quite an array of treasures.
They're just things.
Matthew said the pawnbroker
in Charlottetown buys all kinds of goods.
I hope he's right.
I'm looking forward to seeing Miss
Josephine and staying in a guest room.
Diana says that the manse
is ever so elegant.
Oh, Marilla...
I wish I had something of value
to contribute.
Oh!
-[exhales] We can sell it to the shop.
-Oh, there's no need to--
This is a family effort.
Anne...
come here.
Matthew is...
It's not wise for me to leave.
I need to be home.
[exhales softly]
I'll go on my own, Marilla.
I can do it.
I'm a veteran voyager,
and I'll be back before you know it.
-Jerry will accompany you.
-What?
No, I'll be fine on my own.
I don't need company.
It's not for company.
It's for safety and assistance.
But this could be
a quintessential hero's journey.
You're not going alone and that's final.
He'll auction the shire,
and take his last wages from the sale.
-But I don't need--
-I'll not hear another word of protest.
It makes Marilla feel better
to have you along,
but I really don't need you to come.
-I've traveled alone without incident.
-You've been lucky.
I've been smart.
So then both. Whatever.
I'd simply like you to acknowledge the
fact that I don't actually need your help.
When's the last time you drove a sleigh?
Auction a horse? Let's go.
[Diana] Anne!
-Anne!
-[exhales] Diana!
Diana! W-What are you doing here?
I'm so glad I caught you.
I brought you something to sell.
Oh.
Oh, Diana, are you sure?
Of course I'm sure.
Thank you.
-[Marilla] Morning, Diana.
-Good morning, Miss Cuthbert.
I just came to say goodbye.
Be sure to get to Miss Barry's
before nightfall. Be safe.
We will.
Be sure to tell Matthew not to worry.
Everything will be all right. You'll see.
-[exhales]
-[clicks tongue]
[horse groans]
It's not so bad
to ask for help sometimes, you know.
If I needed help, I would say so.
-No, you wouldn't.
-Yes, I would.
-Wouldn't.
-Would!
-Times infinity.
-What?
[Anne] Never mind. Let's not talk.
[sings "Il Était Une Bergère"]
No singing.
I mean it.
I'm serious, Jerry.
This is an important journey.
I will kill you with my bare hands!
[sighs]
[Jerry continues singing]
[horse neighs]
[shop bell dings]
[door closes]
[Jeannie] Hello there.
I see you've been here before.
Only in my dreams.
Well, how may I help you today?
-I am here to return a dress.
-Is something wrong with it?
Not a thing.
Do you not like it?
It is my very favorite thing
that I have ever possessed in life.
But I need to return it to help my family.
You're Anne. Matthew's Anne.
I am. How nice it is
to hear it said that way.
What happened, dear?
Why do the Cuthberts need help?
[exhales] Um...
[sobs]
[Anne sobs, sniffles]
[no audible dialogue]
Did Matthew really spend this much?
You're worth a lot to him.
-Put it in here for safekeeping.
-Thank you.
[Marilla] "He healeth the broken in heart,
and bindeth up their wounds.
He telleth the number of the stars,
and calleth them all by their names."
[Anne] Stop here! That's it!
-It's all right.
-I'll meet you back here after. Yes?
I hate to say goodbye.
I won't be so long.
[sighs] To the horse, Jerry.
Why are you so annoying?
[sighs]
You're a good horse, Burty.
Try to remember that.
Somebody will be very lucky to have you.
[chuckles]
You'll be fine.
[exhales deeply]
[dogs barking]
So, you've been entrusted, eh?
-How old are you?
-Old enough.
All righty, Old Enough.
Let's see what's what.
[grunts]
Ain't much I ain't got, so...
I can't say as I'll be too interested.
That's understandable.
If these were ordinary items.
But they're not.
Never heard that before.
Nope. Dime a dozen.
I doubt it. My parents were given that
as a gift when in service of the Queen.
Oh, sure, sure.
It was made by the royal potter.
Don't you recognize the stamp?
The Queen was indebted to them
for the intelligence they brought
during the Boer War.
-That's all I'm at liberty to say.
-Intelligence? Meaning what?
Espionage.
-Meaning what?
-Spying.
For the crown.
I'm sorry, that's all I can reveal.
What a crock!
Amethyst.
Hmm.
-Don't care.
-That is a very special brooch.
Hmm.
Not to me.
-It's been in our family for generations.
-So keep it.
Look, maybe I can give you
a small sum for it.
To be nice.
Maybe.
Let's see what else you got.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Those letters aren't for sale.
Letters? Don't want 'em.
I'm keeping all this correspondence
from the tsar for posterity.
-They shouldn't have been packed.
-What a piece of work you are. The tsar?
Alexander had an inclination
towards mysticism.
And he found my great-grandmother
fascinating. She had psychic abilities.
I'll never part with them.
But I am willing
to let the Queen Victoria vanity set go
and a few other precious items.
There's only so much one has room for.
We're, uh, moving back
to the manse in England soon,
and there's too much to travel with.
The house there is so full of treasures.
I shouldn't have told you so much,
after we went to all this trouble
to dress me in a humble fashion
so as to avoid interest from highwaymen.
-So who's this from? Queenie or Russki?
-Neither.
No, that I believe
belonged to Prince Albert.
If you can't afford it,
I completely understand.
[scoffs]
Ladies, how is every little thing?
Oh, let's just move that
a little to the left.
A little more.
Mm. A little more.
Good.
Pronouncement.
We will be passing the hat at the recital
for those who have lost their income
when the Dal Marie went down.
The Cuthberts were hit particular hard.
I don't really know them. Do you?
"Be not forgetful
to entertain strangers...
for thereby some
have entertained angels unawares."
In the spirit of Christmas, I know
everyone will be moved to generosity.
Thank you.
[horse nickering]
[Jerry groans]
[grunting]
[coughs]
[Jerry groans]
[indistinct conversation]
-[exhales] Gilbert.
-Anne.
-Hello.
-Gilbert. [stammers]
I think I need to sit down. I...
Sure.
[Anne] You like working on the docks?
It's a means to an end.
I hope to get hired on a steamer soon.
May I ask, what about your farm?
I don't have to decide right now.
I want to see some of the world first.
If I come back to Avonlea...
I want it to be my choice,
not an obligation.
It's what my dad would have wanted.
Sorry to hear about Mr. Cuthbert
taking sick and all those troubles.
[Anne] Still seems unreal.
Even though I just sold all our...
Everything.
-But thank you.
-He's a good man.
He offered to help me with my land
come spring.
I love him with all my heart.
I don't know what I'd do if...
-I owe you an apology.
-No, you don't.
-Yes, I do.
-I should apologize to you.
-No, you shouldn't.
-I was rude.
-But it was my fault.
-Can we please not argue for once?
Can you stop contradicting me?
Gilbert... I am very sorry that
I wasn't more sensitive about your father,
and what losing him really meant for you.
It's water under the bridge.
I know so much more now than I did then.
[sighs] Anyway...
Anyway.
I should... I should go. Work.
This one looks perfect.
"Green Gables in Avonlea."
[door opens]
Nice.
[door closes]
I've missed you.
Yeah?
At school. There's no one to compete with.
You want to spell out a few words
for old time's sake?
How about... truce?
T-R-U-C-E.
[both chuckling]
-Moody would've gotten that wrong.
-He would've!
-Get away from her!
-Stop, Jerry! Stop! Stop! I-I-I know him.
Jerry, what happened to you?
Are you all right?
-I'm fine.
-[sighs] Come here, come here.
Sit down.
Okay. What happened?
I'm so sorry. They took it.
The money. Bad guys took the money.
Don't turn around.
-So sorry.
-We need to get you to Miss Barry's.
I don't like the city.
I remember you now from the big fire.
I-I'm Jerry.
Gilbert.
Need my help with anything?
Anything I can do?
Just take care of yourself.
Come home someday.
Yeah.
-Hope everything works out.
-For you, too.
Au revoir.
Uh, yes. Bye.
Bye.
[exhales]
[horse neighs]
[Anne] Are you sure you're all right?
[Jerry] I'm not so bad.
So you sold everything?
Yes.
[exhales]
This is a palace, not a house.
You sure this is the right place?
[Anne] This is the address.
-Yes?
-[Anne] We're here to see Miss Barry.
-Is she at home?
-Who shall I say is calling?
Anne of Green Gables.
For heaven's sake, Rollings,
these are my guests!
Come in. Come in. Come in from the cold.
I was beginning
to think you weren't coming.
Oh, my dear Anne,
it's very good to see you. Ah...
Dear me! Whatever has happened to you?
-Rollings, take poor, um...
-Uh, Jerry.
...Jerry, here, downstairs.
We'll get you cleaned up and sorted.
Thank you. That's very kind. See you
in the morning. I'll look after Belle.
For heaven's sake!
There's room at this inn!
You won't be sleeping in the stable.
I've guest rooms prepared for each of you.
So run along and wash up,
then join us for supper. This way, Anne.
My, my,
this is an extraordinary undertaking
under perfectly dreadful circumstances!
It has been that.
Oh, this city is rife with ruffians.
It's a wonder anyone can walk down
the streets alone anymore.
Good strong lad.
You'll manage things
at Green Gables, won't you?
What? What have I said?
We can't keep Jerry on.
He was getting the last of his wages
as part of the sale of the horse.
-But how will you run the farm?
-We're more concerned with saving it.
We'll get to that part later.
You must let me help.
Oh, Miss Barry, you're so kind,
but unfortunately I can't accept.
Stuff and nonsense!
This is no time to stand on pride.
The Cuthberts will not accept charity,
and so as a Cuthbert, neither can I.
Hmm.
[breathes heavily]
You shouldn't have let her go.
Oh, please don't fret so.
Anne and Jerry will be safe together.
-Here. Just take a little.
-[groans]
You and Anne,
you'd be better off if I were gone.
What? I won't have you talking like this.
My life insurance will hold you both
in good stead.
I won't hear it.
It's what I wish for.
Why would you wish that?
You mustn't think such thoughts.
-We need you here.
-No.
Anne loves you.
You have to remember that.
But... her future.
Which do you think she would choose?
This house... or you?
Now stop this morbid foolishness.
[creaking]
[owl hooting]
Anne? Anne!
Can I sleep here?
[exhales] What?
W-Why? What's wrong?
I never...
At home, I don't have my own bed.
What are you doing?
There's so many of us,
this is how we sleep.
Don't worry, I don't kick my sisters.
You'd better not.
[exhales deeply]
Everything will be all right.
It'll be all right.
[Anne] Thank you for providing us
with such a lovely port in the storm.
Merci beaucoup. The food was amazing.
[Miss Barry] Glad to hear it.
Books also provide ports in the storm.
George Eliot. I don't know him.
He is a her. Mary Ann Evans.
How wonderful.
A nom de plume.
If you do write a book someday,
I pray you won't need one.
-Thank you.
-Oh, not at all. Not at all.
-[chuckles]
-Oh. [chuckles]
Rollings...
Madam.
Jerry, I have something for you, too.
You're going to stay on at Green Gables,
and I'm going to pay for it.
-Oh, Miss Barry, I've already--
-This is a business arrangement.
I am offering you a job, at fair wages,
that happens to be at Green Gables.
Do you accept?
[Jerry] Um...
Oui. I do. Merci.
Good lad.
I'll be outside for a bit,
tending to the livestock.
I hope you've let go
of that fool notion of last night.
We've been together all these years.
Thick or thin.
So don't think I'll put up with you
slipping away now.
Anne will be home today,
and she'll be very happy to see you.
[door opens, closes]
[breathes heavily]
[bed creaks]
[exhales]
[cows mooing]
[horse neighs]
[gun clicks]
[Jeannie] Hello?
[softly] Matthew.
Jeannie.
-It's all right.
-[Marilla] Matthew!
Jeannie, help me get him to bed.
And I couldn't have found your Anne
more delightful if I tried.
I didn't know she sold it.
It made her so very happy to help.
I don't want her suffering...
because of me.
Do you think she'd ever recover
from losing you this way?
Matthew, you know too well
the impact of an untimely death.
Anne has suffered so much loss.
She finally belongs.
Here.
With you.
[Matthew exhales]
Don't ever get old.
Too late for that.
I'll be on my way.
Take care.
[horse snorts]
[exhales]
[Marilla] How could you?
How could you even think it?
[sighs]
You would have left us that way? Left me?
Uh, the thought o-of being...
I...
I couldn't...
But I won't leave you.
I won't leave you and Anne.
Would you forgive me?
Forgive me.
[Anne] I'm home!
[exhales]
You are a sight for sore eyes,
Mr. Cuthbert.
Mm.
-[exhales] Are you feeling any better?
-Mm. I am. I am.
[Anne chuckles]
[exhales]
This is from Josephine Barry.
Give it back. I won't take charity.
But... love isn't charity.
I won't take it.
-May I ask why not?
-We will not be pitied!
[exhales] I don't want people thinking
we can't fend for ourselves.
Well, at the moment, we can't.
And I'd sure give my last bit of strength
or my last dollar to help a friend.
And I know that friend would feel grateful
and loved above all else.
And I do.
I feel very grateful to have
such a dear friend as Miss Barry.
Sometimes, you just have to
let people love you, Marilla.
You're quite right.
[sighs]
Even adding this,
and even with the cattle I sold,
it's still a ways from enough.
-We still have a little more time.
-A little.
-Very little.
-Plenty.
There are still three weeks
until the end of December.
Three weeks?
We could... sell off some farm equipment.
If we're lucky.
I know what else I can sell.
Good day.
My name is Anne Shirley-Cuthbert,
and I'd like to offer you my services.
For a small wage, I can give your home
a thorough cleaning before the holidays.
I have all my own supplies.
I can sweep, dust and scrub floors.
[Anne] "When a tender affection
has been storing itself in us
through many of our years...
the idea that we could accept
any exchange for it
seems to be a cheapening of our lives.
And we can set a watch
over our affections and our constancy...
as we can over other treasures."
[exhales]
We're rich, aren't we, Matthew?
Well, now, I suppose we are.
Anne, Matthew.
Jerry, here, has something for us.
Joyeux Noël.
♪ Angels we have heard on high ♪
♪ Sweetly singing o'er the plains ♪
♪ And the mountains in reply ♪
♪ Echoing their joyous strains ♪
♪ Gloria... ♪
We have some happy news, Anne.
I put a notice in the paper
to take in boarders.
We have two confirmed.
Now that we have a sizeable portion
of what we owe,
and we'll have steady income,
I'll pay a visit to the bank right after
the holidays to see about the terms.
[exhales]
So maybe we can keep Green Gables?
♪ And the mountains in reply ♪
♪ Echoing their joyous strains ♪
♪ Gloria ♪
♪ In excelsis Deo ♪
I'm excited to have a whole new year
in front of us,
just bursting with possibility.
The last one was quite an adventure,
wasn't it?
-Uh, it was, indeed.
-[chuckles]
Mmm. What a bounty.
You ladies have outdone yourselves.
It's simple fare, but thank you.
I wonder what's happened
to that other fellow you were expecting.
[knock on door]
That must be him.
I'll get it.
[exhales]
[sighs deeply]
Please tell me this is Green Gables.
[exhales]
It is, indeed. Won't you come in?
[breath trembles]
[exhales deeply]